8.64 For example, the availability of public childcare services in Mexico through supply-side and demand-side incentives—such as subsidies to low-income earning women and grants for childcare facilities—had a dual effect on the involvement of women in the labour force. First, low-income mothers received assistance in finding paid employment. Second, the initiative created some 45,000 paid positions for caregivers and their assistants - the majority of whom were women (OECD 2012)80.

8.65 In Brazil, children aged 0–3 who live in low-income neighbourhoods could access integrated social, health, and educational services through the Rio de Janeiro Public Day Care programme. According to Barros et al. (2011), the programme had significant impact on female economic opportunities as mothers' employment increased by 27 per cent, and a very high utilisation rate resulted from having access to the programme.81 While India-specific research on the impact of access to childcare is very limited, some of the studies that examined the situation in India are presented below.

8.66 According to a qualitative study by Mobile Creches NGO in 4 states (Gujarat, Jharkhand, Odisha, Karnataka)82 carried out in December 2021- February 2022, 61 per cent of employed women availing creches relied on NGOs, while the share of government-run creches was relatively small (21 per cent). The employed women not availing creches relied mainly on adult family members (41 per cent) and elder daughters (11 per cent). The study found a positive impact of quality creche facilities on women's well-being, income, child well-being, and relationships with family members.

#### *Need for a wholesome policy for elderly care*

8.72 As per a recent position paper on senior care reforms by the NITI Aayog88, while the elderly care industry is presently estimated at USD 7 billion (₹57,881 crore), there remain critical gaps in infrastructure, research, and know-how for geriatric illness management, monitoring mechanisms and emergency response systems. India, therefore, needs a structured elderly care policy framework.

8.73 According to the ADB report89, the working capacity of older people is a sizeable economic resource. Utilising this 'silver dividend' of untapped work capacity of population aged 60-69 years is estimated to increase GDP by an average of 1.5 per cent for Asian economies. The report advocates for age-friendly jobs with a gradual work-to-retirement path encompassing lifelong learning and skill development. From the care perspective, suitable job roles for older population can offer social engagement, financial security, besides reducing the overall care requirement. Box VIII.6 presents some suggestions on building a care economy ecosystem in the country.
#### **Box VIII.6: Building a better care ecosystem**

Strategic reforms are required to build a solid structure of the care economy. The reforms could be along the following lines: (i) support for parental leave policies; (ii) subsidies for care services; (iii) public and private investments in building care infrastructure; (iv) mechanisms for skill training for care workers; and (v) mechanisms for monitoring service quality and benchmarks; offers a comprehensive framework for addressing the gender disparities in care and domestic work and boosting women's labour force participation. Some specific policy interventions could be:
8.74 The non-government sector has developed innovative solutions for the rising need for elderly care providers. Tata-funded start-up Goodfellows91 is a leading initiative attempting to tackle the challenge of loneliness, which has been termed as a serious health issue putting individuals at a greater risk of dementia and mental decline.92 This start-up hires young people called "grandpals" having emotional intelligence and empathy to interact with lonely senior citizens longing for companionship. It is also an excellent example of strengthening multigenerational communication and understanding, with mutual benefits.